What did Copernicus create?
R = Copernicus created a model of the universe

What did the universe place?
R = The universe placed the sun

What did the universe which placed the sun at the centre of the universe (heliocentrism) – challenge?
R = The universe which placed the sun at the centre of the universe (heliocentrism) – challenging the prevailing orthodoxy of the time – which believed the earth at the centre of the universe

What did the time – believe?
R = The time – believed the earth

What did His major work De revolutionibus orbium coelestium (1543) (On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres) be?
R = His major work de revolutionibus orbium coelestium (1543) (on the revolutions of the celestial spheres) was published

What did His major work De revolutionibus orbium coelestium (1543) (On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres) mark?
R = His major work de revolutionibus orbium coelestium (1543) (on the revolutions of the celestial spheres) marked an important scientific landmark – it was a key moment in the scientific revolution of the renaissance period

What did Copernicus excel?
R = Copernicus excelled in many different fields –

What did many different fields – he be?
R = Many different fields – he was a practising physician, economist, diplomat, scholar

Where did Copernicus be bear?
R = Copernicus was born in the city of thorn in the province of royal prussia

What did His father be?
R = His father was a wealthy merchant, who was also politically active in supporting poland against the teutonic order, and he played a leading role in peace negotiations between the two factions

What did a wealthy merchant support?
R = A wealthy merchant supporting poland against the teutonic order

What did His mother’s family be?
R = His mother’s family were very wealthy

What did Copernicus be?
R = Copernicus was given a full education

What did by his maternal uncle be give?
R = By his maternal uncle was given copernicus

What did Copernicus become?
R = Copernicus became prolific in several languages, including spoken latin, german, polish, greek and italian

What did spoken Latin, German, Polish, Greek and Italian include?
R = Spoken latin, german, polish, greek and italian including several languages

Where did He study?
R = He studied at the cathedral school

What did astronomy and mathematics, Aristotelian philosophy and Aristotelian natural-sciences include?
R = Astronomy and mathematics, aristotelian philosophy and aristotelian natural-sciences included copernicus’ studies

What did Copernicus supplement?
R = Copernicus supplemented his studies

What did works by Euclid, Pythagoras, Plutarch, Ptolemy include?
R = Works by euclid, pythagoras, plutarch, ptolemy including his own private reading

What did many works relate?
R = Many works related to astronomy

Where did Copernicus leave?
R = Copernicus left in 1496

What did he study?
R = He studied canon law

What did he complete?
R = He completing his studies

What did he succeed?
R = He succeeded to the warmia canonry

What did he ordain?
R = He ordained as a priest

What did the humanities be?
R = The humanities were of greater interest to him

What did Copernicus begin?
R = Copernicus began making an increasing number of astronomical observations, such as the lunar eclipse of 1500

What did Copernicus begin make?
R = Copernicus began making an increasing number of astronomical observations, such as the lunar eclipse of 1500

What did he develop?
R = He develop a different view of the universe

Where did Copernicus return?
R = Copernicus returned in 1503

What did he serve?
R = He served to his uncle who was the prince bishop of warmia

What did he become?
R = He became involved in diplomatic negotiations over the ongoing tensions between prussia and the tuetonic order

What did he involve?
R = He involved in diplomatic negotiations over the ongoing tensions between prussia and the tuetonic order

What did Copernicus be?
R = Copernicus was broadly supportive of the humanist movement, which sought to offer a more liberal approach to life, literature and the sciences

What did the humanist movement seek?
R = The humanist movement sought to offer a more liberal approach to life, literature and the sciences

What did the humanist movement seek to offer?
R = The humanist movement sought to offer a more liberal approach

What did He print?
R = He printed translations

What did Greek literature show?
R = Greek literature showed his support for more a more liberal approach to non-christian literature

What did He feel?
R = He felt his scientific studies and reading was fully compatible with being a good catholic christian

What did He read?
R = He reading was fully compatible with being a good catholic christian

What did he show?
R = He showed any interest in the new protestant reformation movement

What did Copernicus believe?
R = Copernicus believed the right attitude was to use his god given reason and scientific method and not just rely on blind faith in scriptures

What did Copernicus be to use?
R = Copernicus was to use his god

Where did He write?
R = He writes in his preface to de revolutionibus

What did “ If perchance there should be foolish speakers who, together with those ignorant of all mathematics, will take?
R = “ if perchance there should be foolish speakers who, together with those ignorant of all mathematics, will take it

What did the Scriptures distort?
R = The scriptures distorted to their purpose

What did they be?
R = They are of no importance

What did I despise?
R = I despise their judgment

What did Copernicus move?
R = Copernicus moved to frombrook

What did he continue?
R = He continued to make more astronomical observations

What did he continue to make?
R = He continued to make more astronomical observations

What did eccentricity s?
R = Eccentricity s the earth

What did he use?
R = He used fairly primitive instruments and telescopes

What did These observations develop?
R = These observations develop his heliocentric view of the universe

What did He share?
R = He shared his radical ideas and observations in private letters

What did he fear?
R = He feared receiving criticism and scorn

What did he fear receive?
R = He feared receiving criticism

What did Copernicus finish write?
R = Copernicus finished writing his life’s great work dē revolutionibus orbium coelestium

What did The sun be?
R = The sun is not inappropriately called by some people the lantern of the universe, its mind by others, and its ruler by still others

What did by some people the lantern of the universe call?
R = By some people the lantern of the universe called the sun

What did The Thrice Greatest label?
R = The thrice greatest labels it

What did the sun govern?
R = The sun governs the family of planets

What did 1. There be?
R = 1. there is no one center of all the celestial circles or spheres

What did 2. The center of the earth be?
R = 2. the center of the earth is not the center of the universe

What did 3. All the spheres revolve?
R = 3. all the spheres revolve about the sun as their midpoint

What did the sun be?
R = The sun is the center of the universe

What did by friends and even the Pope and Catholic cardinals in the Vatican show?
R = By friends and even the pope and catholic cardinals in the vatican shown some favourable interest

What did one story say?
R = One story says that on the very day he died, he awoke from a coma to view his life’s work finally printed – before dying peacefully in his sleep

What did he to view?
R = He to view his life’s work

What did work finally printed – s?
R = Work finally printed – s his life

What did Gresham s?
R = Gresham s law – the idea that bad (debased money) drives out good money

What did he create?
R = He created the first attempt at a quantity theory of money – inflation was related to the amount of money in circulation

What did – Inflation relate?
R = – inflation related to the amount of money in circulation

What did this become?
R = This became a principle element of economic theory

What did It be?
R = It was important

What did governments struggle?
R = Governments struggled with currency devaluation

What did His writings on economics become?
R = His writings on economics became influential for both prussia and germany (teutonic states)

What did only a small number of astronomers and intellectuals accept?
R = Only a small number of astronomers and intellectuals accepted copernicus’s heliocentric viewpoint

What did biblical scripture place?
R = Biblical scripture placed as the ultimate authority

What did The Protestant reformation reject?
R = The protestant reformation rejected copernicism

What did more objections from Catholic church be?
R = More objections from catholic church were being made

What did Members of the inquisition, such as Francesco Ingoli write?
R = Members of the inquisition, such as francesco ingoli wrote copernicism was theologically heretical

What did such as Francesco Ingoli wrote Copernicism be?
R = Such as francesco ingoli wrote copernicism was theologically heretical

What did Galileo s?
R = Galileo s work

What did Galileo’s (1564-1642) work in astronomy make?
R = Galileo’s (1564-1642) work in astronomy made him

What did Galileo’s (1564-1642) work in astronomy made him come?
R = Galileo’s (1564-1642) work in astronomy made him come to the conclusion copernicus was right

What did improved telescopes find?
R = Improved telescopes found moons orbiting the planet jupiter

What did he receive?
R = He received considerable opposition

What did he become?
R = He became convicted of heresy

What did heliocentrism be?
R = Heliocentrism was contrary to the sense and authority of holy scripture

Where did Galileo be place?
R = Galileo was placed under house arrest

What did Galileo play?
R = Galileo played a key role

What did Galileo see?
R = Galileo seeing heliocentrism accepted as scientific fact

What did Copernicus’ De revolutionibus and Galileo’s Dialogue Concerning?
R = Copernicus’ de revolutionibus and galileo’s dialogue concerning the two chief world systems

What did Copernicus’ De revolutionibus and Galileo’s Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems be?
R = Copernicus’ de revolutionibus and galileo’s dialogue concerning the two chief world systems were placed on the catholic church’s prohibited list

What did Copernicus’ De revolutionibus and Galileo’s Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems be place?
R = Copernicus’ de revolutionibus and galileo’s dialogue concerning the two chief world systems were placed on the catholic church’s prohibited list

