English Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting 
English The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed . 
English Are there any comments ? 
English Mr President , on Monday I made a point of order about President Nicole Fontaine 's reported comments in the I British press regarding her recent visit with Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II . 
English A British Labour Member of this House , Mr Miller , repeated what were purported to be the Queen 'sremarks , I not once but three times , on Monday , on Tuesday and on Wednesday . 
English He sought to drag the Queen into a political controversy and to use her name to score cheap political  
English Mr President , it may be that President Fontaine was unfamiliar with the British rules of protocol which obtain in such matters , but Mr Miller has no such excuse . 
English He knows perfectly well that ours is a non - political Head of State . 
English He knows perfectly well that for nearly fifty years she has scrupulously avoided engaging in controversial political issues . 
English He knows perfectly well that she cannot come to this House to set the record straight . 
English His behaviour is a disgrace and a scandal . 
English Mr President , I am proud to be British but today I am ashamed to share my nationality with that man . 
English Has he no shame ? 
English Has he no respect ? 
English Has he no decency or honour at all ? 
English Mr President , I wish to use this point of order to speak in my capacity as chairman of the delegation for relations with the countries of Central America and Mexico . 
English As you will be aware , elections were held in Mexico last Sunday . 
English Yesterday the delegation which I chair met and discussed a report drawn up by our fellow Members who had been I to Mexico to act as observers at these elections on behalf of this Parliament . 
English Mr President , I would ask you to see if the President of this Parliament could forward our resolution , the I complete text of which you will receive today , to the Mexican authorities . 
English Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to draw your attention to something really annoying in connection with the Minutes . 
English The - & # x2018 ; Texts Adopted & # x2019 ; - also form part of the Minutes . 
English pointed out yesterday during the vote on the directive to combat money laundering the English translation of I Article 6 ( 3 ) needs to be corrected to bring it in line with Amendment No 26, because the English I translation is wrong . 
English In the middle of the second paragraph of the English version there is only a reference to representation in legal proceedings , but no reference to legal consultants , as there is in the German text . 
English That is a key point in this directive and since the Council working group is working on the basis of the I English text it is quite crucial to correct this text . 
English I had already complained about this in committee vis à vis the language services . 
English At the time the committee decided not to table an amendment because the German text is the original version , as drafted by the rapporteur . 
English I complained about this yesterday -- the situation was not remedied -- and today is the third time I am complaining about it ! 
English I do think the services of this House should work more carefully on such key questions and it really is intolerable that despite my criticism yesterday the Minutes have got the text wrong again ! 
English I would ask you get to the bottom of this matter , to sort out this most important aspect of the directive and to please correct this in the English translation ! 
English Mr President , yesterday we received a communication on yellow paper from the vice - president , with some nuts attached to it . 
English This note was about supporting the export of products from Vanuatu , a developing country in the Pacific . 
English I think that is a very good idea and quite right . 
English And I am quite happy to support it . 
English But what rather puzzles me is that in it the vice - president quite explicitly stated that it is illegal to import these nuts into the European Union . 
English So I must ask this vice - president to explain how these nuts came to be illegally imported , since it was he who delivered them to us ! 
English That in itself is a contradiction so would he please clarify the matter . 
English ( Laughter and applause ) 
English ( The Minutes were approved ) 
English Welcome 
English Committee on Petitions -- European Ombudsman 
English The next item is the joint debate on the following reports , tabled on behalf of the Committee on Petitions : 
English ( A5 - 0162 / 2000 ) by Mrs Lambert , on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions during the parliamentary year 1999 - 2000 ; 
English ( A5 - 0181 / 2000 ) by Mrs Thors , on the annual report on the activities of the European Ombudsman in 1999 . 
English Mr President , I am glad to have the opportunity to address the European Parliament concerning the results of my work as European Ombudsman in the year 1999 . 
English The Annual Report for 1999 covers the last year of the first mandate of the European Ombudsman . 
English Last year the Ombudsman 's office received 1,577 new complaints compared to 1,372 in 1998, an increase of nearly 15 % . 
English The number of inquiries opened rose from 171 in 1998 to 206 in 1999, an increase of over 20 % . 
English As well as becoming better known , the European Ombudsman is also attracting a higher proportion of serious complaints which require full investigation . 
English You may be interested to know that the same trend has continued to the present year . 
English During the first six months of this year , the number of new inquiries rose by 32 % over the same period in 1999 . 
English Inquiries are the most resource - intensive aspect of the Ombudsman 's work . 
English It is therefore a great challenge to deal with this increase , whilst maintaining the quality of our work and meeting our target of closing most inquiries within one year . 
English I do hope that the European Parliament will support the Ombudsman in seeking the resources needed to carry out the work effectively . 
English During 1999, we continued to receive a quite high proportion of complaints , over 70 % , which lay outside the mandate of the European Ombudsman . 
English The proportion of the complaints outside the mandate even increased slightly , probably because we received a growing number of complaints by e - mail . 
English We gladly accept complaints by e - mail and many of them contain well -- presented allegations of maladministration . 
English I However in all , more of the e - mail complaints are directed against authorities of Member States . 
English During the campaign for the election of a European Ombudsman last year , some critical voices suggested that the Ombudsman 's mandate should be broadened to include complaints against Member States in cases where a question of European Union law is involved . 
English I am not sure whether they understood that this would mean the European Ombudsman carrying out tasks currently belonging to the European Commission as the guardian of the Treaty , and to the European Parliament I as the democratic forum to which citizens may address petitions . 
English We study carefully all the complaints we receive , especially if they involve rights under European Union law . 
English In 1999, we managed to advise the complainant , or transfer the complaint to a competent body , in about half of the cases . 
English Of these , we transferred 71 cases to the European Parliament to be dealt with as petitions and advised a further 142 complainants of their rights to petition the European Parliament . 
English In many cases , complaints against national , regional or local authorities could be dealt with effectively I by an Ombudsman in the Member States concerned . 