Galileo was born in Florence, Italy in 1564 to a poor but noble family.

His parents recognised their child’s innate intelligence and talents and so made sacrifices to have him educated. At his father’s insistence, Galileo studied the profitable career of medicine. But, at the University of Pisa, Galileo became fascinated in a wide range of subjects. He was also critical of many of Aristotle’s teaching which had dominated education for the past 2,000 years.

Galileo was appointed to be a mathematics professor at the University of Pisa, but his strident criticisms of Aristotle left him isolated amongst his contemporaries. After three years of persecution, he resigned and went to the Yniversity of Padua, where he taught maths. His entertaining lectures attracted a large following and he was able to spend the next 18 years pursuing his interests in astronomy and mechanics.

During this time, Galileo made important discoveries about gravity, inertia and also developed the forerunner of the thermometer. Galileo also worked tirelessly on the science of gnomonics (telling time by shadows) and the laws of motion.

It was in astronomy that Galileo became most famous. In particular his support for heliocentrism, he garnered the opposition of the Holy Roman Catholic Church.

Galileo came to the same conclusions of Copernicus – that the sun was the centre of the universe and not the earth.

Galileo was also a great admirer of Johannes Kepler for his work on planetary motions; Galileo often wrote to Kepler.

By inventing the world’s first telescope, Galileo was able to make many ground-breaking explorations of the universe. He found that:

Saturn had a beautiful ring of clouds.
The moon was not flat but had mountains and craters.
Jupiter had many moons which revolved around Jupiter rather than directly the sun.
Thus, Galileo not only had the mathematical proofs of Copernicus, but, also new proof from the science of astronomy. However, Galileo knew that publishing these studies would bring the disapproval of the church authorities. Yet, he also felt a willingness to risk the church’s displeasure.

The Church had already started to forbid Galileo’s teachings, especially anything that supported Copernicus. However, in 1623, a new pope, Pope Urban VIII seemed to be more liberally minded and he allowed Galileo to publish his great works on astronomy – supporting the ideas of Copernicus.

However, after publication, conservative elements within the Church sought to attack Galileo’s beliefs and writings. As a consequence, Galileo was arrested and imprisoned for several months. He was convicted of heresy and was forced to recant his beliefs. He spent the remaining years of his life under house arrest at Arceti.

Galileo had three children. He was especially close to one of his daughters, Polissena; she took the name of Sister Maria Celeste and entered a convent near Arceti.

Despite being censured by the church, Galileo continued to make discoveries until death overtook him in 1642. Under house arrest, he was able to write Two New Sciences, this summarised his earlier work on the new sciences now called kinematics and strength of materials He was blind by the time he passed away.
James Watt (1736 – 1819) was a Scottish inventor, mechanical engineer and chemist. He is famous for developing a separate condensing chamber for the steam engine. This invention greatly improved the efficiency of the steam engine and played a considerable role in advancing the role of steam engines in the Industrial revolution.

He was born in Greenock, Scotland on 18 January 1736. Initially Watt worked as a maker of mathematical instruments, but later found himself working with steam engines.

Around 1764, Watt was repairing a Newcomen steam engine to repair. He realised it was very inefficient because energy was repeatedly being used to heat the cylinder. He caused the steam to condense in a separate chamber apart from the piston. He soon had a working model and by 1775 had a patent. Though Watt was not adept at business, he was able to form a successful partnership with Matthew Boulton. Boulton & Watt became a successful company leasing the design and later producing these new steam engines for a variety of purposes from mines to cloth and wool manufacturer. Over the next six years, he made a number of other improvements to the steam engine and the business thrived as orders flooded in.

Watt also made other important discoveries and inventions. These included a copying machine and an improved production method for chlorine – a bleaching agent.

After his fortune enabled him to retire, he pursued a wide variety of interests from improving oil lamps to measuring distances by telescopes.

He died in 25 August 18191, aged 83.

The development of an efficient steam engine transformed industry and society. It helped Great Britain become the world’s first industrialised society leading to an unprecedented pace of economic growth.
John Harrison was born in Foulby, near Wakefield in West Yorkshire. His father worked as a carpenter, and John followed his father into the carpentry business. He also developed a passion for music and learning how clocks work. It was said, as a youngster, he would take clocks apart and put them back together.

Harrison combined his skills of being a carpenter with making new clocks. Later clocks also added extra features, such as the grasshopper escapement to improve the quality of clocks. The grasshopper escapement provided a controlled and step by set process for releasing the energy of the clock. His pendulum clocks are considered to be some of the most accurate clocks of the age.

Although a good inventor, he was less skilled at dealing with people, Harrison was helped by George Graham and Edmond Halley, who helped finance, encourage and advocate on behalf of Harrison.

His most important invention was finding a solution to the issue of longitude. For a long time, the ability to know a ship’s longitude position had not been found. Numerous attempts had been made, but none successful. The ability to know longitude was essential to the safe navigation of ships. The problem was considered so important, Parliament offered a £20,000 reward for the first person who could provide a solution. Sir Isaac Newton himself had doubted whether such a device could be created.

Harrison’s invention was to develop a clock able to tolerate fluctuations in temperature and air pressure, and could keep very exact time for a long time. It took Harrison five years to develop his first sea clock (H1). It incorporated roller pinions, wooden wheels and two dumbbell balances linked together. After receiving approval of Royal Society, it was given its first sea trial on a route to Portugal. The tests proved very favourable, with Harrison’s clock accurately predicting longitude (compared to the old methods which were 60 miles out.) However, this was not enough for the Parliamentary prize which required use on transatlantic routes.

Over the next few years, he built different versions, improving on the design. Changing bar balances to circular balances (not affected by the rolling action of the sea). His next models, H2 and H3 were never entirely successful, and around 1750 Harrison abandoned his Sea Clock, and started working on a smaller sea watch.

Incorporating elements of other watches, built by Thomas Judge, Harrison worked on a Marine watch (H4). Although taking another six years to build, Harrison was able to prove successfully that by using this watch Longitude could be accurately measured. On the first trial to Jamaica, the Marine Watch proved very accurate. However, the Parliament board kept back the prize, arguing that it might have been harrison-watchdue to good luck. Harrison had to do other trials, and in the meantime came up with a second sea watch H5. Again, it proved reliable, but again Parliament withheld the full prize. Enlisting the help of the King George III, Harrison was eventually award £8,750 – though by that time he was 80 years old. The full prize was never awarded to anyone.

Harrison’s lifework had been completed after years of hard work on improving the design. It was soon widely used. For example, fellow Yorkshireman Captain James Cook, used a copy of H4 on his second and third journeys. Despite their high cost, they proved very useful for safer navigation.

Harrison died at the ripe age of 83, and was buried in Hampstead. Harrison’s device was later improved upon by John Arnold, who enabled the production of cheaper Chronometer’s – enabling their widespread use in shipping.

Today the restored H1, H2, H3, and H4 can be on display at the National Maritime Musem in Greenwich.

Leonardo was born an illegitimate son of a Florentine noble and peasant woman and grew up in Vinci, Italy. In his formative years he developed a love of nature and from an early age displayed his remarkable academic and artistic talents and capacities.

In 1466 he moved to Florence where he entered the workshop of Verrocchio. His early style reflected his teacher, but he soon developed an artistic sense which went far beyond his teachers rigid style. His first work of great significance was the “Adoration of the Magi” commissioned by monks of San Donato a Scopeto. Although unfinished, the work was a masterpiece and introduced several new ideas. In particular he introduced the themes of movement and drama. He also pioneered the use of Chiaroscuro. This is the technique of defining forms through the contrast of light and shadow. This would be later used to great effect in the Mona Lisa.

In 1482 Leonardo went to the court of Ludovico Sforza for 16 years in Milan. Here he continued painting and also branched out into other interest such as engineering and anatomy.  During this period he painted the famous “Madonna on the Rocks” and also “the Last Supper” This has been described as one of the greatest spiritual paintings. With Christ at the centre of the picture it embodies great feeling and action as Christ is about to announce his imminent betrayal. Unfortunately over the time the quality of the original painting has deteriorated despite frequent restoration attempts.

Leonardo Da Vinci and Mona Lisa

In 1499 his patron L. Sfoza was defeated by the French invasion, thus Leonardo returned to Florence. During this period he painted the fresco of the battle of Anghiari. This artwork was to exert tremendous influence over future artists. However it was unfortunately never completed and was later destroyed. It was also in this period that Leonardo completed The Mona Lisa. The Mona Lisa is one of the worlds most famous and intriguing pictures. The Mona Lisa is a portrait of a wife of a Florentine noble. For several days she came to Leonardo and sat for her portrait to be painted. However she refused to smile, Leonardo even tried hiring musicians but to no avail. One day just for a fleeting second she gave a faint smile and Leonardo was able to capture it. Her smile encapsulates a tremendous mysteriousness which is both fascinating and intriguing. Sri Chinmoy said of the Mona Lisa.

“That smile has immortalized her, immortalized the artist and immortalized the art. Artist and art have been immortalized by just a faint smile, a smile that has an enigmatic touch. Even now a soul-touch is there, and that soul-touch has conquered the heart of the world.” (1)
In this picture Leonardo masters the techniques of sfumato and chiaroscuro. Sfumato involves the most gradual switch from colour to the other giving a very delicate and expressive images. Chiaroscuro as mentioned before highlights the contrasts light and shadow. In the Mona Lisa this is most evident in the contrast between face and dark background.

In this period Leonardo extended his studies into engineering, science and other subjects. There seemed to be no end to his interest. He made copious notes in his complex mirror handwriting. A lot of which wasn’t deciphered in his lifetime. He also drew complex models of machines, in particular he was fascinated by flight. He used to buy birds just so that he could release them so he could enjoy watching them fly away. He also attempted to build a flying object himself. Machines that he drew on paper, such as helicopters, would become a reality many centuries later. If his medicinal studies had been published, it would have revolutionised the science, as he was one of the first to understand the circulation of blood within the body. There seemed to be no limit in the scope of his interest and work.

Between 1506-1510 Leonardo spent time in Milan working on behalf of the very generous French King Lois XII. In 1513 he travelled to Rome where he enjoyed the patronage of the new Medici pope, Leo X. Here he worked with contemporaries such as the great Masters Michelangelo and Raphael. In 1515 he left to settle at the castle of Cloux, near Amboise by the kind invitation of Francis I of France. Here he spent his last years free to pursue his own studies. He died in 1519 leaving behind one of the greatest body of artistic and scientific works.
Nicolaus Copernicus (1473 – 1543)  – Polish / Prussian mathematician and astronomer. Copernicus created a model of the universe which placed the sun at the centre of the universe (heliocentrism) – challenging the prevailing orthodoxy of the time – which believed the earth at the centre of the universe.

His major work De revolutionibus orbium coelestium (1543) (On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres) was published just before his death and marked an important scientific landmark – it was a key moment in the scientific revolution of the Renaissance period.

As well as being a pioneering astronomer, Copernicus excelled in many different fields – he was a practising physician, economist, diplomat, scholar and gained a doctorate in canon law.

Early Life Copernicus

Copernicus was born 19 February 1473, in the city of Thorn in the province of Royal Prussia – the Kingdom of Poland. [Copernicus would likely have considered himself Prussian.] His father was a wealthy merchant, who was also politically active in supporting Poland against the Teutonic Order, and he played a leading role in  peace negotiations between the two factions. His mother’s family were also very wealthy and influential making Copernicus well connected throughout his life.

After the death of his father, Copernicus was given a full education by his maternal uncle. Copernicus became prolific in several languages, including spoken Latin, German, Polish, Greek and Italian.  He studied at the Cathedral School at Wloclawek and the University of Krakow. Copernicus’ studies included astronomy and mathematics, Aristotelian philosophy and Aristotelian natural-sciences.

Copernicus supplemented his studies with his own private reading, including works by Euclid, Pythagoras, Plutarch, Ptolemy and many works related to astronomy.

In 1496, Copernicus left to the University of Bologne Italy, where he studied Canon Law with a view to a career in the church. After completing his studies, he temporarily succeeded to the Warmia Canonry. However, he was never fully ordained as a priest and turned away from Canon law – preferring the humanities which were of greater interest to him.

Copernicus also began making an increasing number of astronomical observations, such as the lunar eclipse of 1500. It was through his close studies and also astronomical observations, that he began to increasingly develop a different view of the Universe to which most people held at the time.

In addition, to these studies in became a practising physicist, and would perform operations on many significant people throughout his life.

In 1503, Copernicus returned to Poland where he served as secretary to his uncle who was the Prince Bishop of Warmia. In this capacity he also became involved in diplomatic negotiations over the ongoing tensions between Prussia and the Tuetonic Order.

Religious beliefs

Copernicus was broadly supportive of the humanist movement, which sought to offer a more liberal approach to life, literature and the sciences. He printed translations of Greek literature, which showed his support for more a more liberal approach to non-Christian literature.

He felt his scientific studies and reading was fully compatible with being a good Catholic Christian; he also never showed any interest in the new Protestant Reformation movement. Copernicus believed the right attitude was to use his God given reason and scientific method and not just rely on blind faith in scriptures. He writes in his preface to De revolutionibus

“ If perchance there should be foolish speakers who, together with those ignorant of all mathematics, will take it upon themselves to decide concerning these things, and because of some place in the Scriptures wickedly distorted to their purpose, should dare to assail this my work, they are of no importance to me, to such an extent do I despise their judgment as rash”
Heliocentric view of the Universe

After the death of his uncle Copernicus moved to Frombrook, in the Kingdom of Poland where he continued to make more astronomical observations, such as viewing Mars, Saturn and the earth’s eccentricity in relation to movement to the stars; he used fairly primitive instruments and telescopes in these observation. These observations continued to inform and develop his heliocentric view of the universe. He shared his radical ideas and  observations in private letters, but held back from publishing because he feared receiving criticism and scorn for his revolutionary new theories.

In 1532, Copernicus finished writing his life’s great work Dē revolutionibus orbium coelestium. The major points of the work included:

“The sun is not inappropriately called by some people the lantern of the universe, its mind by others, and its ruler by still others. The Thrice Greatest labels it a visible god, and Sophocles’ Electra, the all-seeing. Thus indeed, as though seated on a royal throne, the sun governs the family of planets revolving around it.”
1. There is no one center of all the celestial circles or spheres.
2. The center of the earth is not the center of the universe, but only of gravity and of the lunar sphere.
3. All the spheres revolve about the sun as their midpoint, and therefore the sun is the center of the universe.

He was very reluctant to publish, despite some favourable interest shown by friends and even the Pope and Catholic cardinals in the Vatican.

However, encouraged by friends, students and elements within the Church, he finally published in 1543, the year of his death. He died on 24 May 1543 – one story says that on the very day he died, he awoke from a coma to view his life’s work finally printed – before dying peacefully in his sleep.

Economics

Amongst his many achievements, Copernicus was also a pioneering economist. He developed a theory on the value of money (later became known as Gresham’s Law – the idea that bad (debased money) drives out good money. In 1517, he created the first attempt at a quantity theory of money – Inflation was related to the amount of money in circulation; this became a principle element of economic theory. It was  important for that particular time period, where governments struggled with currency devaluation. His writings on economics became influential for both Prussia and Germany (Teutonic states).

 

Influence of Copernicus’ work

For sixty years after his death, only a small number of astronomers and intellectuals accepted Copernicus’s heliocentric viewpoint. However on publication of his thesis, there was little controversy and no real criticism from the church.

There were theological objections from leading figures in the Protestant reformation, such as Martin Luther and John Calvin. The Protestant reformation, placed biblical scripture as the ultimate authority and rejected Copernicism for the perceived conflict with Biblical sources.

However, by 1616, more objections from Catholic church were being made. Members of the inquisition, such as Francesco Ingoli wrote Copernicism was theologically heretical.

Galileo’s (1564-1642) work in astronomy made him come to the conclusion Copernicus was right. In particular, it was Galileo (with the use of improved telescopes) who found moons orbiting the planet Jupiter; this was a justification for Copernicus’ view. But as Galileo advanced the view of heliocentrism, he received considerable opposition from the Catholic Church, and he became convicted of heresy on the basis that heliocentrism was contrary to the sense and authority of Holy Scripture. Galileo was placed under house arrest for many years. But, Galileo played a key role in seeing heliocentrism accepted as scientific fact.

Copernicus’ De revolutionibus and Galileo’s Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems were placed on the Catholic Church’s prohibited list until 1835.

Copernican Revolution

The Copernican Revolution is said to be the period from 1543 to the time of Isaac Newton and his works on gravity.
Sir Isaac Newton was born on Christmas Day, in 1643, to a relatively poor farming family. His father died 3 months before he was born. His mother later remarried, but her second husband did not get on with Isaac; leading to friction between Isaac and his parents. The young Isaac attended school at King’s School, Grantham in Lincolnshire (where his signature is still inscribed in the walls.. Isaac was one of the top students, but before completing his studies his mother withdrew him from school, so Isaac could work as a farmer. It was only through the intervention of the headmaster that Isaac was able to return to finish his studies; he passed his final exams with very good results, and was able to go to Trinity College, Cambridge.

Newton at Cambridge

At Cambridge he was able to pursue his interests in mathematics, science and physics. At the time the prevailing education was based on Aristotle, but Isaac was more interested in modern mathematicians such as Rene Descartes. Isaac Newton had a prodigious capacity to consider mathematical problems, and then focus on them until he had solved the mystery behind them. His one pointed nature led him to, at times, be detached from the world. For example, he had little time for women. An early teenage romance came to nothing, and he remained single throughout his life.

Sir Isaac Newton, has been referred to as one of the greatest genius’ of history. His mathematical and scientific achievements give credence to such a view. Amongst his many accomplishments in the field of science include:

Developing a theory of Calculus. Unfortunately, at the same time as Newton, calculus was being developed by Leibinz.  When Leibinz published his results, there was a bitter feud between the two men, with Newton claiming plagiarism. This bitter feud lasted until Leibinz death in 1713, it also extended between British mathematicians and the continent.

Mathematical Achievements of Newton

Generalized binomial theorem
Newton’s identities,
Newton’s method,
classified cubic plane curves (polynomials of degree three in two variables),
Substantial contributions to the theory of finite differences,
Use of fractional indices
Used geometry to derive solutions to Diophantine equations.
Used power series with confidence and to revert power series.
Discovered a new formula for pi.
Scientific Achievements of Newton

Optics – Newton made great advancements into the study of optics. In particular he developed the spectrum by splitting white light through a prism.
Telescope – Made significant improvements to the development of the telescope. However, when his ideas were criticised by Hooke, Newton withdrew from the public debate. He developed an antagonistic and hostile attitude to Hooke, throughout his life.
Mechanics and Gravitation. In his famous book Principa Mathematica. Newton explained the three laws of motion that laid the framework for modern physics.
This involved explaining planetary movements.
Newton Hit on the Head with an Apple

The most popular anecdote about Sir Isaac Newton is the story of how the theory of gravitation came to him, after being hit on the head with a falling apple. In reality, Newton and his friends may have exaggerated this story. Nevertheless, it is quite likely that seeing apples fall from trees may have influenced his theories of gravity.

Newton’s Religious Belief’s

As well as being a scientist, Newton actually spent more time investigating religious issues. He read the Bible daily, believing it to be the word of God. Nevertheless, he was not satisfied with the Christian interpretations of the Bible. For example, he rejected the philosophy of the Holy Trinity, his beliefs were closer to the Christian beliefs in Arainism (basically there was a difference between Jesus Christ and God)

Newton – Bible Code

Newton was fascinated with the early Church and also the last chapter of the Bible Revelations. He spent many hours poring over the Bible, trying to find the secret Bible Code. He was rumoured to be a Rosicrucian. However, the religious belief’s that Newton held could have caused serious embarrassment at the time. Because of this he kept his views hidden, almost to the point of obsession. This desire for secrecy seemed to be part of his nature. It was only on his death that his papers were opened up. The bishop who first opened Newton’s box, actually found them too shocking for public release, therefore, they were kept closed for many more years.

Newton and Alchemy

Newton was also interested in alchemy. He experimented on many objects, using a lot of Mercury. Very high levels of mercury in his blood stream may have contributed to his early death and irregularities in later life.

Newton was made member of the Royal Society in 1703. He was also given the job of Master of Mint in 1717. He took this job seriously and unofficially was responsible for moving England from the silver standard to the gold standard.

Newton was an extraordinary polymath; the universe simply fascinated him. He sought to discover the hidden and outer mysteries of life. With his sharp intellect and powers of concentration, he was able to contribute to tremendous developments in many areas of science. 



